{
    "title": "2017-2018 Objectives"
}

## ADCS

This year corresponds the B phase of the Attitude Determination and
Control System (ADCS) of the ECE3SAT. Our work will be centralized on 4
fields.

First of all, we want our satellite to be as open source as possible,
that's why we are going to develop our visibility and to document all
our work through the year. That means we are going to be much more
present on social media, post videos, communicate…

Secondly, we need to electronically simulate our environment. To do so
we will implement our model of the ECE3SAT in a physical engine made on
the computer.

Thirdly, we need a reliable control algorithm which will take the
decisions based on the data filtered from sensors. It means we are going
to design and implement our ADCS algorithms so that it is reusable both
for the simulation and physical experiments (and hopefully usable on the
final ECE3SAT with the least effort possible).

Finally, we will build an experimental setup to emulate our own test
environment with a controllable magnetic field (via Helmholtz coils).

## EPS

During this year, we will first start by ending phase A. Then, we will
handle phase B. You will find below this year’s main objectives.

- Ending phase A :
    - Test the battery charging time with solar panels using a battery
        loaded at 20% which is the minimum value required.
    - Change/add components :
        - Add switches to the model with ISIS and test it.
        - Look for an alternative to MPPT.
    - Find out how to provide energy alternatively with solar panels
        and battery.
        - Consider battery as primary source of energy, then check
            again battery charging time.
    - PV cells’ efficiency under sunlight :
        - Improve current delivered by MPPT in order to charge the
            battery while current is used by all components.
- Phase B :
    - Design EPS module :
        - Choice of each component.
        - Test all components together.
    - Pooling of the entire CubeSat.
    - Platform test :
        - Rotation’s tests at different speeds
        - Analyze those tests :
            - Correlation position/variables(orientation, luminosity,
                temperature, magnetism)
            - Energy harvested (while position static at different
                angles, and rotation at different speed).

## OBC

This year is OBC's second phase out of 4. This year's goal is to
determine the global architecture of the ECE3Sat and to write the
specification of the OBC.

In order to fulfill this objective, we will have several tasks.

First, we will study the already launched CubeSats and the various
architectures (centralized vs distributed). This will allow us to choose
the most suited for our mission.

We will write the specifications of the OBC hardware and software to
allow next year's team to implement it.

We will write the specifications of the communication protocol (which
messages, which frequency, which criticality, ...).

Finally, we will study the means of simulation to assess the quality of
the implementation.

## TCS

Throughout this year, we will have to engage with a number of challenges
with various difficulties that will arouse as this project develops.

One of the first tasks we will have to accomplish, is the verification
and confirmation of the experimental values recorded by our predecessors
working in phase 2 of the project.

Once our knowledge and understanding of the values is up to date, we
shall then proceed in identifying the problems and reflect upon these to
find suitable and convincing resolutions.

Our next step will be to cover up all issues considering the Yagi
antenna, this will include carrying out a series of tests to make this
antenna functional using the “FunCube” satellite system available to
all.

After the antenna has been tested, we will advance to the simulation and
the conception of the antenna that will be placed and stored inside our
CubeSat. This antenna will of course be tested. As we progress through a
series of examinations we will attempt to communicate between the two
antennas, Yagi and CubeSat antenna. We will emit signals between both of
these. To confirm and bring conclusion to all these steps; one final
test will then ensue. The use of a stratospheric balloon to test our
communication system in near space likewise conditions.

The progress will be visible to all on social media through videos as we
carry out our testing protocols followed by our Wiki that will also be
updated. Thanks to the Space society at ECE, our project will benefit
from enhanced communication capabilities
